>>>>[THEME MUSIC] And I think
many people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>It felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
You know, the Bible
is broken down
into two main sections--
the Old Testament
and the New Testament.
And on "Beyond
Belief," we're going
to concentrate on this
program on the Old Testament
with biblical scholar and
expert Michael Heiser.
Michael, always a pleasure.
How are you?
>>MICHAEL HEISER: Very good.
>>NOORY: I want
to compliment you
on the work you've done
for us on our radio show,
"Coast to Coast AM."
>>HEISER: Oh, it's fun.
>>NOORY: Because
it's truly riveting,
the information that
you bring to us.
I'm looking forward to
this discussion too.
>>HEISER: Yeah.
I'm just glad that I
get a chance to be on.
Because, like I said, it's fun.
>>NOORY: Let's talk about the
Old Testament on this program.
>>HEISER: Mm-hmm.
>>NOORY: My biblical studies
from my catechism classes
back in Catholic days told
me a lot about Genesis.
Explain to us the Old Testament.
>>HEISER: The Old Testament,
our Old Testament anyway,
is 39 books in the
Protestant canon.
There are different canons,
different collections.
The word canon just
means collection.
So it's the sacred
scriptures to Judaism,
those who would be in ancient
Canaan, the Israelites,
whatnot.
Also, of course, to Christians
of all different varieties too.
It's just that the collection
that we call the Old Testament
sometimes varies
just a little bit
between Christian denominations.
>>NOORY: The Old Testament
highlighted a lot
on creation and on prophecy.
In terms of prophecy, what
does it spell out for us?
>>HEISER: Well, a lot of what
prophets actually did and said
is, from our
perspective, history.
And even in their day,
a lot of it was history.
You can really break it down
into two things that they did.
Prophets would preach.
In other words, they
would tell people, hey,
you're not living
according up to God's law.
So they were sort of Covenant
enforcers in that way.
But then they would also
do predictive prophecy.
They would get
messages from God,
either symbolically
or orally, by ear,
or they would see a vision.
And it might be a near
future kind of thing,
where it would be
fulfilled in a few years
or maybe in a few days.
And then you would get these
remote prophecies that even
people like us are still
looking for the culmination,
the fulfillment,
of those things.
>>NOORY: How were these prophets
looked at by the population
of that time?
>>HEISER: Well, I think it's
fair to say they were feared.
Because oftentimes things
would happen in their wake,
so to speak.
There's a passage
that described Samuel,
who was a prophet, as saying,
when he came into town,
the people trembled.
Because it's like, what's
going to happen now?
>>NOORY: He's always
bad news, right?
>>HEISER: Yeah, he's
going to give bad news.
Something bad might happen.
And then you get a
guy like Ezekiel.
They thought he was sort
of crazy because God
had him do crazy things.
Take off all your clothes.
Lay on your side for
x number of days.
>>NOORY: Talk about your wheel.
>>HEISER: Shave your head.
Yeah, do all this sort of stuff.
So some of them were
a spectacle like that,
but others, again, were
more sort of like ministers,
that kind of thing.
People that would walk around
very respected in the community
and in many cases, feared.
>>NOORY: How did the
governments of that era
react to the prophets?
>>HEISER: It depended on
if what they were saying
went along with what
you wanted to hear.
Isaiah, for instance,
was stationed
in the court of the King.
So he was part of
the royal entourage.
>>NOORY: So he could get
away with most things.
>>HEISER: Right.
He had to get
access to the King,
and a lot of what he said,
again, was in the King's favor.
But if you were a prophet
that was sent to a King
that God didn't
like, then chances
are what you're going to say is
going to get you into trouble.
A lot of prophets
wound up in prison.
Some of them were killed.
So there was a very
hostile relationship too.
>>NOORY: Who channeled
these prophets?
I mean, who created them?
Was it truly something god-like?
Or were these frauds
that picked up
on just what the pulse
of the community was?
>>HEISER: Well, there
were false prophets.
You get discussion
about false prophets
and how to tell false prophets
both in the Old and the New
Testament.
So you do have frauds.
If we're talking about
the biblical prophets,
the idea is someone
who speaks for God.
It's a very old tradition.
It even goes back
to Adam and Noah.
If you were the person
the community looked at
as being the one who spoke
what God wanted heard
by whatever the
audience was, then you
were a prophetic figure.
When we think of
prophets, we think
of the sort of big names--
the Isaiah, the Ezekiel,
big books of the Old
Testament, that sort of thing.
So you could have those
there were, again,
in concert with the Torah
message, the law message.
And then you had others that
were claiming things just
to get a popular audience,
just to have a hearing
and be famous.
>>NOORY: And I'm sure they
pulled that off sometimes.
>>HEISER: They did pull
that off sometimes.
But usually they were exposed.
You actually have confrontations
in the Old Testament
where one prophet would
expose a false prophet.
>>NOORY: Would that be
a crime in those days?
>>HEISER: Oh yeah.
Yeah, that was taken
very seriously.
>>NOORY: Whoops.
>>HEISER: It would've
been something
viewed as blasphemous.
>>NOORY: Sorry, I
thought the asteroid
was coming this week, right?
>>HEISER: Yeah, I mean, usually
because it was so politically
entwined that people could
go in and have a message
and get favor.
But then, you know,
that cuts two ways.
If you go into a situation
and you're a pretender,
and you're making it up as you
go, and you get a few hits,
you get a few winners, and
then that gets you favor,
well, then you're looked at as
the person who has the answers.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>HEISER: So if you ever
come into a situation
where you don't have the
answer, then you're in trouble.
The whole thing's just uprooted.
>>NOORY: Michael, what
is astral prophecy?
>>HEISER: Astral
prophecy is the notion
that God can
communicate, dispense
some sort of message either
symbolically or something
actually going on in the
heavens to deliver a message not
through spoken word but, again,
through signage, celestial
signs.
And it sounds like astrology.
It was different than that.
Our concept of
modern astrology is
that what goes on in the heavens
determines individual fates
and individual destinies--
that sort of thing.
What biblical
astral prophecy is,
is just the idea that there are
things going on the heavens.
And since God is the one who
created the sun, the moon,
and the stars, and
he created them
for times and seasons-- that
comes right out of Genesis--
that God is very well capable
of messaging something
through those celestial objects.
>>NOORY: Michael,
these prophets,
did they talk about good
things and bad things?
>>HEISER: Yeah, you
get a mixture of both.
There is a lot of doom and gloom
to what the prophets are doing.
Especially after
the kingdom divides.
If you know a little bit
about Old Testament history,
we have Saul, David,
and Solomon who
are kings of a unified
country-- all 12 tribes.
And then after the reign of
Solomon, the kingdom splits.
And the kingdom to
the north goes off
and does their own
religious thing.
They have their own religious
practices, their own idols
and things like that.
And so when prophets in
those days, post-Solomon,
would get involved again
politically with kings,
a lot of the message
was negative.
And typically, if you
were sent to the north,
God said go up to
the northern kingdom
and prophesy to so-and-so, it
was going to be a bad message.
Because it was really
going to be about,
if you don't correct this, if
you don't go back and rejoin
the two southern tribes--
and the one in the South
was the tribe of David,
the Lion of David, Judah--
if you don't do that,
this is going to end.
>>NOORY: Were these all Hebrews?
>>HEISER: This is
going to end badly.
>>NOORY: Were they all Hebrews?
>>HEISER: Yeah, initially.
Now, we know in 722 BC that the
Northern kingdom, again, the 10
tribes that defected
after Solomon died,
they were destroyed
by the Assyrians.
And the Assyrians were
just not nice people.
I refer to them as the
Klingons of the Old Testament.
Very nasty.
Even in some of
their own artwork,
they're skinning people
alive and things like this.
Just brutal.
And God said, look.
This is what I told
you would happen.
And so when the
prophet goes up there,
and he's talking about things
like that, hey, you know,
the Assyrians are the big
empire on the block now.
They're going to come
down here and clean house,
that's not a popular message.
But after you have
something like that happen,
and the two southern
tribes eventually
get conquered by Nebuchadnezzar,
the message is naturally bad.
But it's also good,
because this situation
isn't going to last forever.
God will forgive you.
He will bring you
back to the land.
And then we get these visions
of something grand and glorious,
the kingdom of God kickstarted
back on Earth again.
>>NOORY: And Nebuchadnezzar
was from modern day Iraq
now, right?
>>HEISER: Yeah, he was the
Babylonian king at the time.
They had displaced or
replaced Assyria eventually
in the spectrum
of world history.
And the Southern kingdom
eventually apostasizes, again,
becomes disloyal to
the line of David,
disloyal to the God of Israel.
And the prophets did
the same thing there.
You keep this up, God's
going to send Nebuchadnezzar.
You're going to get your butts
kicked spiritually speaking
and physically.
And you're going
to get deported.
He's going to take
you back into Babylon.
That's what happened.
Back in Babylon is where you
get prophets like Ezekiel.
And they're not all
in Palestine or Canaan
or Israel as we think of it.
And Ezekiel's message tends
to be actually fairly positive
in a number of places because
he's there with the captives.
And the first
chapter of Ezekiel,
the famous throne
chariot, the wheel vision,
is really all about a message,
a positive theological message
for the people who
are captives there.
>>NOORY: Were these prophets
like the modern social day
networking, where I mean
they just spread the word?
>>HEISER: You know, that's
really an astute question.
Because people tend to think
because we have prophets
and they're listed by
books in the Bible,
we tend to think that, oh,
when this guy was alive none
of these other ones were.
That is not the case.
You actually have
prophets, their ministries
overlap to a
considerable extent.
So there could be five, six
going on at the same time.
You also had something
called, in the Old Testament,
the school of the prophets.
And that is that prophets would
train people to essentially do
what they did.
And since most of what they
did was really preaching about,
hey, you need to be
loyal to the law of God.
You need to be loyal to the
King and this kind of thing.
They would follow the
big prophet around
and learn, again,
the content of what
he was doing, how
he was doing it.
>>NOORY: From the
apostles, basically.
>>HEISER: Right, essentially
like a discipleship thing.
So you actually had a number
going on at the same time.
>>NOORY: These prophecies would
be how far out in advance?
>>HEISER: Well, you
could get-- again,
if you're talking about
prophecies that we think
of as the end, where the
Kingdom of God returns to Earth,
that sort of thing--
>>NOORY: And they preached end
times prophecy, didn't they?
>>HEISER: We're still
talking about that.
The thing that projects it
out is a lot of the prophecies
that you can tell are projected
way into the future concern
things like regathering
the nations of the world
under the singular
God of Israel.
Now, a lot of the work I
do is related to something
called the divine council.
>>NOORY: And what is that?
>>HEISER: The divine council
is the heavenly host, God
and his heavenly host.
In biblical
theology, it concerns
how that group
administratively runs
the affairs of not
only the unseen world
but the seen world.
And the Tower of Babel
episode is really crucial
in this whole world view,
because Deuteronomy 32:8 says,
when the Most High divided
up the nations with Babel,
he divided them up according
to number of the sons of God.
So it's this notion that
God forsakes the nations,
puts them under
lesser divine beings,
under lesser authorities.
This is the Old
Testament explanation
for where you get pantheons
in the ancient world.
>>NOORY: Intentionally, right?
>>HEISER: Intentionally.
And then he calls Abraham
and creates a people
for himself, which is Israel.
So the whole rest
of the Old Testament
is Israel against the
nations and Israel's God
against the other gods.
Well, you have these visions
of this whole situation
being rectified.
>>NOORY: And this is
still all Old Testament.
>>HEISER: This is still
all Old Testament.
I mean, you'll get Isaiah as
a big prophet for this theme.
When you spill into the New
Testament, the whole idea
of reclaiming the nations,
again establishing
a single kingdom
of God on Earth,
that begins when Jesus shows up.
And there are indications
in the life of Jesus,
even in the birth narrative,
different stories-- where
he goes, what he says when
he's there-- that telegraph
this message but even he says,
this is still in process.
So it's projected way
out into the future.
>>NOORY: Of the Old
Testament, was there
one single prophet who stood
out among all the others?
>>HEISER: Boy, that's
a good question.
I think if you're
talking about prophets
that are in the Holy Land,
it would probably be Isaiah.
We have most of his
work, so chances
are he's the one who said
the most or at least earliest
recorded the most.
>>NOORY: Did he live long?
>>HEISER: He lived in
the 8th century BC.
The Old Testament
doesn't have this,
but Jewish tradition
has him being
finally killed, sawn in
half, actually put into a log
and sawed in half.
Again, that's--
>>NOORY: By hand?
>>HEISER: --a
biblical tradition.
Yeah.
But eventually
Isaiah goes-- he's
one of the prophets
that gets killed.
If you remember, Jesus
would refer to this
a lot of times when he
was in confrontation
with the Pharisees.
He would say things
like, look, you
guys are just-- I'm
just like the prophets.
You're here to kill me.
You've killed off how
many prophets now?
Because they become unpopular.
They are not popular guys.
>>NOORY: Why would a
prophet even consider
saying the wrong thing?
>>HEISER: Well, when you get
to something like Isaiah,
and I think this is
actually a pattern that
goes all the way back.
And I mentioned Adam
before, this whole idea
of being a spokesperson for
God-- Adam, Noah, Moses,
Joshua.
Not all those figures
are called prophets,
but they all have
one thing in common,
and that is a divine encounter.
>>NOORY: A connection with God.
>>HEISER: A connection.
So God comes to them in
some sort of memorable--
and I think if
God came to me, it
would be easy to remember
that day in my life.
But it's a memorable event,
and they get commissioned.
God comes to them and says,
I picked you for this task.
>>NOORY: Bang.
>>HEISER: Yeah, so
that's why they do it.
Because, again, hey, I don't
want to disobey this encounter
message.
You even get arguments though.
Moses actually argues
with God about why
he shouldn't pick him.
Well, I can't speak well.
I can't do this.
I can't do that.
>>NOORY: He didn't
want to be picked.
>>HEISER: Right.
He didn't want to
go back to Egypt,
but God more or less assures
him that at the end of the day,
you're going to be OK.
I'm going to be with you.
And he gives him,
again, signs to show
Pharaoh that are miraculous.
And so Moses quits
fighting and goes
back, but it's really
about the divine encounter.
>>NOORY: Explain this
connection with God
that these prophets had.
Was there anything
scientific about it?
Was there anything that
might connect to UFOs?
Who was this God
that communicated
with these individuals?
>>HEISER: I don't think
there was anything
special about the person because
if you look at the personality
profiles you get in
the Old Testament,
all sorts of backgrounds.
Isaiah, again, is a court
personality, sophisticated,
knows how to handle himself with
the upper echelons of society.
Some are priests.
Some are farmers.
>>NOORY: So he's a
like a prosecuting
attorney or something?
>>HEISER: Right.
You have this real
dramatically diverse background
for who the prophets were.
So I don't think it's
anything specific to them.
I think the indication
is God's looking
for someone who
will do what they're
asked to do and be
faithful with it
and trust him to do the
message, even though it's
going to be very unpopular.
Jeremiah is a classic
example of this.
God comes to him and says, I
knew you before you were born.
This is your destiny.
This is what you're going to do.
Jeremiah doesn't
convince a single person
in his whole life.
>>NOORY: Nothing.
>>HEISER: Nothing,
he gets no results.
And God tells him, nobody's
going to listen to you,
but this is still your task.
This is still your job.
He has one guy who's with
him, Baruch, who's a scribe.
>>NOORY: Was he a bad prophet?
>>HEISER: No, he was a good one.
He did his job.
He winds up getting thrown
into cisterns, in pits,
and all sorts of stuff happens
to him, but he never gives up.
Again, he's resilient.
He's honoring the call.
First chapter of Jeremiah, God
comes to him in human form,
as a man.
It even says that we even
have a tactile reference.
The word of the Lord
reached out and touched him.
So that's actually
a precursor for what
you see in the New
Testament with Jesus--
the idea of the incarnation.
Again, you remember
probably this
from your catechism
training, but the idea of God
becoming man.
The incarnation
is something new,
but God showing up looking as
a man is very Old Testament.
That happens a number of
places, and Jeremiah's situation
was one of those.
>>NOORY: What was
the message that God
tried to convey to the
prophets to pass on to man?
>>HEISER: I think, ultimately,
if you pull yourself
out of the context
of Israelite history,
because, again, in Jeremiah's
case, it's like, well,
in a few years, Nebuchadnezzar's
going to show up,
and you're all going to die.
>>NOORY: He's going
to kill you all.
>>HEISER: So if you pull
yourself out of that,
and you start looking
into the bigger
picture, about
eventually there's
going to come a time when
the whole Earth will be Eden,
this whole restoration
theme, all the nations
will be brought back.
Again, this--
>>NOORY: Good
thing or bad thing?
>>HEISER: Oh, it's
definitely a good thing.
Because in the stream
of biblical theology,
you have to remember in
Genesis, Eden was not the world.
Eden was just a little piece.
>>NOORY: A small piece of it.
>>HEISER: A little piece of it.
It has geography.
We know it's not the world.
But at the end--
>>NOORY: And we
think it was where?
Near the Euphrates?
On the Tigris?
>>HEISER: Yeah.
If you look at the four
river descriptions,
it's going to be right around
there because two of them
are identifiable.
But it's no mistake that
the Book of Revelation
ends with the whole
world described as Eden.
So it's this globalization of
this perfect place, a paradise
motif.
So if you look at that,
you pull yourself out
of just the Israelite context,
it's definitely a good message.
>>NOORY: Were the
prophets, Michael,
trying to better mankind or
scare the living daylights out
of them?
>>HEISER: There is an element,
a strong social justice element,
to the prophets.
Because one of the things
they railed against if they're
saying, look, you need to live
according to the laws of God,
well, a lot of the
laws of God were
about don't abuse the poor.
Don't abuse people who
are less fortunate.
>>NOORY: Don't steal.
They were like the
commandments, somewhat.
>>HEISER: Right, you have
a whole social element.
Really, the law of God
applied to wider society.
And so the prophets would
pick up on abuses like that.
Amos is probably
the most famous.
He spends most of
his time talking
about how people can't get
justice in legal courts
or before the King, really
anywhere, unless they
have money.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>HEISER: And
they're very direct.
People are paying people off.
You think because
your status, you're
getting away with this or that.
This isn't the way
to run a society
and have God approve of it.
So that was part of his message.
>>NOORY: Did people
fear the prophets?
>>HEISER: Again, they did.
Because oftentimes things
happened in their wake.
And again, I used the
example earlier of Samuel.
>>NOORY: Right, here he comes.
>>HEISER: Specifically,
it's kind of funny to us.
But you actually read
it, Samuel comes to town,
the people start trembling.
Something's going to happen,
otherwise he wouldn't show up.
That sort of thing.
>>NOORY: And something happened.
>>HEISER: Yeah, I mean
with enough regularity
that they got spooked by it.
>>NOORY: Now, how did
he know these things?
>>HEISER: The prophet's message,
really, I think is twofold.
The way I would answer
this is, it's very obvious
if you're told at one
point in your life
that, hey, you need
to go to the people
and tell them, again, to
live up to the laws of God.
Live up to the
Covenant relationship
that God has with you.
>>NOORY: And did they all know
what the laws of God were?
>>HEISER: That was
the priesthood.
The responsibility
of the priests
was to disseminate that.
Because I think what
you're angling for here
is that they didn't
all have bibles.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
How'd they know
what the rules were?
>>HEISER: They don't have
any of this written material.
So a lot of this is
again orally handed out.
Oxymoron there, but either
it's dispensed by the priests
and then to the heads
of the families.
The fathers are supposed
to teach their children.
And again, in oral culture,
this is very common.
So the prophets know that stuff.
So on the one hand, they
don't have to be told that.
But when you get into
predictive prophecy,
again, they either have
divine encounters or visions.
God gives them
information on the spot,
or gives it to them in a dream.
And they wake up
thinking God said, well,
now go tell this to so-and-so
what you just saw here.
So it's a mix of both.
>>NOORY: The prophets
of the past, what
happened to them eventually?
And this is pre-Jesus,
but did they stop?
Or did the prophecies continue?
>>HEISER: This is
actually a hot button
issue between what goes
on between the testaments
especially.
I mentioned early on that
there are some books that
are considered sacred
in some traditions that
get put in the Old Testament.
Some would be in the
Protestant Old Testament,
and the Catholic Old Testament
would have a little bit
of a different collection.
>>NOORY: It would be
different-- close but different.
>>HEISER: Close but different.
There are additions there.
And those additions
come from this period.
And so there was a sense
for a lot of people living
in between what we think of
as the Testaments, roughly 500
BC on to about 1st century AD.
>>NOORY: It doesn't seem
that long ago, does it?
>>HEISER: It doesn't, but it is.
But there is this sense that
this kind of activity, God
still needs people to speak
for him that this is going on.
And so some of the material
that people were writing,
and again, they're
preaching, then
that's getting written
down, was considered sacred
by different portions
of the Jewish community.
For instance, the
Dead Sea Scrolls
you will actually have books
other than the Old Testament
that are quoted as
though they are sacred.
There are formulaic
ways of quoting things,
like if I'm an Old
Testament, or a Qumran scribe
living in the Qumran community,
if I wanted to quote scripture,
I would say "thus says the
Lord," or "as it is written"--
these little expressions.
>>NOORY: So it shall be?
>>HEISER: Right, so it shall be.
>>NOORY: One of my favorites.
>>HEISER: Again, little
formulaic things.
Well, sometimes other
books that aren't in,
again, the Protestant Old
Testament are quoted that way.
And so that gives you
a little indication.
And scholars, there are
people who focus specifically
on this topic.
It gives you an
indication that there
were books out there
that were considered very
high in sacred status as well.
>>NOORY: Let's
talk about Ezekiel,
seeing that he lived
during this time period.
What is your interpretation,
Michael, of Ezekiel's wheel?
It's a bizarre story.
>>HEISER: It is.
I think it's a classic
example of astral prophecy.
What you have in Ezekiel
Chapter 1-- and lots of people
are familiar with this.
You have God seated
on the throne,
and the throne has a platform.
And then underneath
the platform,
you have these four
creaturely figures
that are called cherubim,
actually, in Chapter 10.
>>NOORY: Could be
engines, you know?
>>HEISER: They have four
faces, and the four faces, not
coincidentally I
think, correspond
to the cardinal
points of the zodiac,
of the Babylonians' zodiac.
So it's a classic
astral prophecy picture.
We actually know
what they saw because
of the statuary, the iconography
that comes from Babylon
in Ezekiel's own day.
>>NOORY: They did
witness something, right?
>>HEISER: Right.
So they carve it.
We know what the
cherubim look like.
faces look like.
But the real issue
is what does it mean?
Because why would an
Old Testament prophet
use constellations, zodiac
symbolism, in a prophecy
about the God of Israel?
Because this isn't
the sort of thing
that you associate with the
Bible, this astral thinking.
And the messaging is
actually pretty simple.
Ezekiel and any
faithful Israelite
is going to believe because
of Genesis that God created
the sun, moon, stars in their
courses for times and seasons,
passages of epochs and
all that sort of thing.
And so the assumption was that,
well, if he created all that,
God controls that.
And since those
things do mark time,
that's an indication that
God is the force behind what
happens as time passes on.
And so to put the God of
Israel on the throne instead
of the Babylonian
god who should have
been on the throne
of his own symbolism,
to put the God of Israel on
that throne with the four
cardinal points of
the Babylonian zodiac,
the message is pretty clear.
The gods of Babylon are not
the ones running this show.
Yes, we know that
we're in Babylon.
We were taken captive.
We're prisoners.
It's really bad,
but it's not going
to stay this way because their
gods aren't the ones in control
of the circumstances.
Really, it's the God of Israel.
And so it's
theological messaging.
And so much of prophecy,
especially astral prophecy--
>>NOORY: So you don't
think the wheel was a UFO?
>>HEISER: No, I don't
think the wheels are UFOs.
Because they're on the ground.
They're vertical.
They're attached to the throne.
It turns around.
We actually get the same
image in Daniel, Chapter 7.
People don't realize that Daniel
7 uses the same throne image.
>>NOORY: Is it something though?
>>HEISER: Yeah, it's actually
called a throne, a seat.
And the crazy thing about
Daniel is that you have plural.
It says the thrones,
plural, were set.
And that's going
to become fodder.
That chapter in Ezekiel
1 becomes fodder
for something known as
Merkava mysticism in Judaism.
>>NOORY: I've heard of that.
>>HEISER: The word Merkava
means "flying throne chariot."
So it comes right out
of these two chapters.
And so you have a lot of
texts-- and a lot of them
are in the Dead Sea Scrolls--
about these divine throne
room visions, where you not only
have God seated on the throne,
but you have other beings
seated on their own thrones.
>>NOORY: But you could see
how people would interpret it
as something extraterrestrial.
>>HEISER: Oh sure.
Sure, that's easy for us
because, again, we have
a modern technological context.
We have the context of,
again, lots of these stories.
So when we read Ezekiel
it's very easy, again, to--
>>NOORY: To put that into--
>>HEISER: Right, to superimpose
the two things, yeah.
>>NOORY: It's like fallen
angels and ETs, same kind.
>>HEISER: Right.
>>NOORY: Did God really
make everything in six days
and then rest up?
>>HEISER: The way I
would answer this is, I
don't think it really matters.
And I know that's going
to draw a lot of ire
from people in the
audience, but my view
is that Genesis is really
about theological messaging.
It affirms a creator.
This is a
pre-scientific culture.
>>NOORY: Is it accurate?
>>HEISER: Oh, I think it's
accurate to the extent of what
it claims scientifically.
For instance, Genesis,
what it really
claims is that the world we
know, Heaven and Earth we know,
had a beginning.
It didn't cause itself.
It had to have an
external cause.
It wasn't just there.
It's not spontaneous
generation of matter.
Those kinds of big ideas
do conform very nicely
to modern science.
But the people who
wrote this are living
in the second Millennium BC.
>>NOORY: How would
they know this?
>>HEISER: Right, they're not
going to know the details,
the niceties of
modern cosmology,
modern science, for instance.
The Old Testament expresses
the locus of emotion
and thought not in the brain.
There is no biblical Hebrew word
for brain, believe it or not.
So it's a
pre-scientific culture.
>>NOORY: Yes or no--
were the prophets
accurate during this era?
>>HEISER: Yeah, I think
the prophets were accurate.
History bears them out.
You don't really
have a clear instance
of a prophet being wrong.
That was actually the test
of a prophet-- were you
accurate or not?
The assumption
was, if you're not,
you can't be speaking for God.
Because God should know
what's going to happen.
>>NOORY: That's right.
He tells you the way it is.
Michael, thanks for being
on this edition of "Beyond
Belief."
>>HEISER: You're welcome.
>>NOORY: This is fascinating.
That was, of course,
the Old Testament.
In our next program, The
New Testament and what
does that hold?
I'm George Noory, and
this is "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]